So there are two things that are
happening here. The first thing that's
happening is that when you start loving
and feeling gratitude,
all the things that you don't feel
grateful for, that you don't love come
to the surface to get loved. It's like
if you were feeding fish, all of a
sudden you feed one or two of them and
all the fish show up at the pond surface
to get fed. It's the same way. So it's a
natural thing to happen that when love
starts to show up, all the unloved parts
of yourself come. And so often times
you're loving yourself and then anger or
grief shows up and you think what the
heck happened. Well, what happened is
that part of you wants to be loved too.
And if you start loving it, everything
changes. Instead of saying, "Oh, the
grief is bad. I got to get rid of the
grief. Why is there so much grief?" None
of that is loving the grief. But if you
start to love the grief, and you don't
resist it, everything will change. And
you'll start noticing that there's even
love in grief. So that's the first thing
that's happening. And the second thing
that's happening is often times it's
very hard for people to stay in a place
of love or gratitude because they're not
used to it and they're scared of what's
going to come next. We seem to have this
thing that happens in us where it's
like, "Oh, I
am having so many good things happen. I
have to be afraid because it's going to
go away." Well, of course it's going to
go away. All the bad things went away,
too. But because we're scared of that,
because we're like, "Oh, goodness
gracious. That's going to go away." we
cut it off ourselves. And the only thing
you can really do there is the same
thing you would do in yoga is just to
stretch yourself into those emotional
states every once in a while and to
really just learn how to enjoy and savor
those states. And the other thing that's
happening is what's stopping the state
is the fear that it's going to go away.
And in your question, it's like scared
that the house is going to go away,
scared that the cat is going to go away.
So can you love that fear? Can you love
that loss?
So the problem in making decisions and
we go into this deeply in the decisions
course is that you are trying to avoid
an outcome but the outcome that you're
trying to avoid is an emotional outcome.
So you're saying oh I don't want to feel
like a failure. I don't want to feel bad
or I don't want to feel like I was
stupid or whatever the thing is that you
don't want to feel and so you're trying
to make a decision to prevent yourself
from feeling that way. But if you love
to feel that way, if you have no problem
feeling stupid or have no problem
feeling like you're dumb or whatever it
is or like you've lost something, then
all of a sudden the decision-m becomes a
lot easier. And so then the next
question is, why would anybody want to
feel dumb? Well, it's because it's
exactly in those moments that you can
see the patterns that you've been living
in that you can undo. I love feeling
emotionally abandoned because I know
that in those moments I'm in my trauma
and that there's something for me to
heal and there's some way for me to
grow. So that's the easiest way to do
it. But the other thing that starts
happening when you start to really love
these emotions that we call bad is that
we find out that they're not the same
thing when we're not resisting them. And
when we stop resisting this, oh my gosh,
something bad's going to happen. Often
times it's an excitement that something
good is going to happen.
So, how to how to navigate the liinal
space? The best thing to do is really
not navigate it at all. So, the best
thing to do is to just be present with
what's going on, feel everything that's
coming up to the surface, and not try to
reconstruct your life. So, what's
happened if you've had an identity shift
is that all of a sudden you don't know
exactly what you're going to do or who
you're going to do or how you're going
to do or what you're going to be or how
you're going to be because your identity
is different. But if you try to shove it
into a box as soon as possible, what
you're doing is you're using the old
mental model to shove it into the box.
So instead of that, just be in the
unknown for as long as you possibly can
be. And watch what unravels naturally.
And it will it will all of a sudden
you'll be in the supermarket. You'll
know what to order, know what to eat,
know who to be with, know what friends
work, know what feels good. But if you
try to make it happen too quickly, it
gets all fakata and you have to do the
work often again and again until you can
just allow yourself to be in the unknown
because you yourself are somewhat
unknown in that moment. And so if you're
not being with what is and you're trying
to make it something that you can
control,
then you're losing the power of changing
who you are. Yeah. So it's completely
natural for you to be anxious with the
relaxation. I know that that sounds
weird, but it's a completely natural
thing. So, typically what happens is
that whenever there's any kind of change
happening, we start to get anxious.
Something feels uncomfortable. It's as
easy as this. Like, you put your two
hands together like this. You fold your
fingers down. You go, "Okay, that feels
a certain way." And then you put your
hands like this and you do it the other
way. You're like, "Oh, that feels
uncomfortable. That feels weird." So
yeah, it feels weird to start relaxing
when you felt like you had to earn all
the love that you needed or wanted. And
so you can find out, oh, I don't have to
do anything. But then what's occurring
is the love is actually coming in. That
relaxation is actually allowing the love
to come in. Because if you think about
what happiness is, what joy is, one way
to define it is that it is what's going
on right now minus the expectations. And
so if you don't have the expectation
that you have to do something to earn
it, all of a sudden it's just there and
it's available to you. And having that
anxiety with the love is a completely
natural thing because having that
anxiety with love is basically saying,
"Oh, I'm scared I'm going to lose this."
And it's a very natural piece especially
because most of our lives we have been
chasing the love instead of actually
allowing it to land in us all on its
own.
I totally agree to agree on this one.
Yeah.
There is nothing that you need to do.
So, think about it like an oak tree. You
know what's the perfect oak tree? Is it
the perfect oak tree, the acorn, or is
it the sapling? Or is it the 20-year-old
oak tree or the 100red-year-old oak
tree? Which one's perfect?
Which one's good enough? Which one has
flaws?
So, the reality is is that we're always
evolving and we don't have to think of
it as we have to improve ourselves. And
so that's actually where I would point
you is that just because you're learning
something doesn't mean that it means you
have to improve yourself. Doesn't mean
that you aren't good enough as you are.
And if you're learning to love that,
then probably what's happening is you're
taking what people are saying, and some
of them definitely think you have to
improve yourself, don't get me wrong.
Right? But you're taking some of what
people are saying and you're turning it
into something that you have to do. It's
becoming a should. It becomes a have to.
But it doesn't have to become any of
that stuff. It can be what you want. It
can be just the nature of evolution. It
can be just like a child learning to
walk. Of course, they want to walk. They
don't have to. They just walk
eventually.
Yeah, I'm with you. Having had little
kids.
[laughter]
I'm totally with you. Um, the most
profound practice I've ever had in my
spiritual journey was handin-hand
parenting, which was how I raised my
children. It was unbelievably
life-changing for me about my emotions,
which specifically we'll talk to the
fact that you weren't allowed to cry as
a kid. It'll I wasn't allowed to cry as
a kid either. And so, this was the thing
that I did that really taught me how
to learn how to cry, learn my emotions.
And it was all because I was parenting.
There is no separation between personal
growth and meditation and raising
children. Some of my most deep
meditative states have been with my
children where I've gone down the rabbit
hole with them and just hung out with
them in their world. Kids are incredibly
present and if you allow yourself to
join them there, it's an amazing form of
meditation.
Wow, thank you very much for the
compliment. That uh that felt great. Uh
how to resculpt yourself. I really
recommend not resculpting yourself. I
recommend a discovery process where
you're not trying to make yourself into
anything, but you're just allowing
yourself to find out who you are. What I
notice is that in each stage of
development, what occurs is that you
don't quite know anything [laughter] and
you have to feel your way around it. And
this happens as an adult, but it also
happens as a kid. So, when you're a
little one and you're learning like how
to move your hands, the first thing is
you don't even know it's your hand. And
then the second thing is, oh, I know
this is my hand, but I don't know how to
control it. So, I scratch my face. And
then I will go, oh, that's my hand and I
can control it. And that's the important
thing is those shifts have to be allowed
to be in the unknown for an extended
period of time so that you can learn and
go through all the stages of oh this is
my hand and it's mine and I can control
it. But if you try to force that process
it often stagnates the growth or it
stops the epiphany before it has a full
chance to blossom. We have a great
podcast on this called once over should.
So probably what's happening 80% chance
what's happening is there's a lot of
shoulding and have to there's a lot of
shame that's going on in your system and
you're not in touch with your wants. So
if you can learn how to be in touch with
your wants instead of the thing that you
should do meaning I want to run instead
of I should run. I want to do this thing
instead of I have to do this thing or
I've got to do this thing. this problem
or apparent problem of taking a long
time between the decision and the action
will start to dissipate very quickly.
Hey, thanks for the question. Uh we do
have a video on it. It's called what's
beneath your fear of being seen. It's
not perfectly on point, but the themes
are there, which is very much about how
to be present with not being seen, with
being seen, but the discomfort of both
and what happens to you when you put it
in the moment instead of thinking about
it in the future. So, I think you'll
love that video. If you have any other
questions after that, let us know.
So, I was watching this uh movie once.
It was called the bridge and it's
basically them filming the Golden Gate
Bridge for an extended period of time
and just catching people jumping off of
it and then exploring
what made them jump. And one of the
stories was this guy, he uh a couple
days before he jumped, he wrote in chalk
on the cement, "End me."
And I thought to myself, wow, that's
exactly the same thing that monks want.
All the monks that I ever knew
meditating, they were also trying to
create sessation in themselves.
And so what I've discovered at that
moment was that self-improvement
is a form of self annihilation as much
as self-sabotage is. In either case,
we're trying to escape the ego. trying
to escape that constant incessant self-t
talk that's telling us what to do or
telling us we're not good enough or
defining us as something small instead
of the expansive thing that we are. And
so that's why it's compelling. It's
because it's part of the evolutionary
necessity of life is to find ourselves
again and again, redefine ourselves
again and again until we find out what
we truly are. So if you really want to
stop the self-sabotage, find out what
you really are,
find out what's actually there beyond
all of the sabotage, be behind all of
the self-improvement, the thing that's
always been there that has always going
to be there that no matter what, from
infant to adulthood has always been
there. Find out what's looking out
behind your eyes and the self-sabotage
will end.
[music]